


Google built this for its internal systems. This project's initial name is BORD. Later they renamed it as OMEGA. 

In 2014 Google handed it to CNCF as an open source project. Then they named it Kubernetes / K8s. 


CNCF : Cloud Native Computing Foundation. They manage open source projects. Anyone can contribute to this project: you, me, anyone. Generally they will have two types of projects:
1. Graduated : a fully matured project that a large number of organisations are using 
2. Incubated : still feature enhancement is going on. We may face some feature limitations. 

K8s Architecture : 

Conrol Plane : brain of K8s
Data Plane : Hands of K8s


1. CONTROL PLANE COMPONENTS : 

1.1 kube-apiserver / apiserver : 
--> This is the front door of Kubernetes. This is the single point of contact to communicate with the Kubernetes cluster. 
--> If you want to deploy any workload, if you want to view the existing workload, or if you want to delete the existing workload, you communicate with the Kube API server by using "Kubectl". 
--> KubeAPI server validates the configuration (pod, service, deployment). 

kubectl apply -f file1.yaml  10 pods --> 
kubectl apply -f file2.yaml
kubectl create ns myapp
kubectl delete ns myapp

1.2 etcd (etc distributed) : (tradiitonal linux hasve its all config in /etc they picked same and k8s works across nodes so, they add d - distribution) 
- ETCD contains all the information about a Kubernetes cluster, its configuration, and its workload.
- In ETCD all the information is stored in key-value pairs.
- Treat ETCD as the Kubernetes full-fledged database.
- It stores the current and desired state of the cluster.  5 pods existing --> 5 new pods
- If we lose access to etcd, our cluster state is lost. 
- STRICT COMMUNICATION : no component in Kubernetes speaks to etcd directly except the API server. Everything else (scheduler, controller manager) goes through the API server to read and write data. 


1.3 kube-scheduler : 
- It looks for an available worker node to run our workload based on node resource utilisation, like CPU or memory. 
- When it wants to run the pod, it will pick the best node to run our workload. 

1.4 Kube-Controller-Manager : 
- Kube-Controller-Manager acts as a supervisor.
- This firstly monitors "etcd" and ensures our application's current state matches the desired state.
- If we ask for 10 replicas and only 5 are running, it sends instructions to kube-scheduler to pick the node.
- Kube-Controller-Manager runs in the background in a loop. It always checks with etcd and makes sure the desired state matches the actual state.

1.5 Cloud-Controller-maneger: this will extend Kubernetes capabilities to cloud resources to utilise IAM roles, VPC, load balancers, EFS, and EBS components. 


2. DATA PLANE / WORKER NODE : 

2.1 kubelet : 
- Kubelet is an AGENT that runs in every worker node. 
- Kubelet listens to all the control plane instructions and ensures our containers (described in the pod) are running and healthy. 
- If any container goes down, kubelet will restart it automatically. 

2.2 kubeproxy : 
- Kube-proxy is a networking component. This also runs on every node, similar to kubelet. 
- Kubeproxy assigns an IP address to every pod created on the worker node. 
- The primary purpose is to handle network communications inside and outside of the cluster. Kube-proxy ensures traffic reaches the right container. 

2.3 container runtime : 
- Container runtime is responsible for pulling images and running containers. 
- k8s uses containerd / CRI-O as runtime from version 1.24. (earlier used docker)
- Kubelet sends instructions to the container runtime to pull the image and start the container inside the pod. 


==========

EKS (Elastic Kubernetes Service): This is an AWS fully managed Kubernetes service. AWS takes care of all the control plane components. 

For high availability and fault tolerance, AWS maintains multiple copies, at least six copies across three availability zones, which will be maintained or managed by AWS.

Limitations:
- We cannot access control plane nodes.
- We don't get the option to see where those control plane nodes are running.

Amazon EC2 Managed Node Group : **
- AWS automatically provisions and configures managed instances. 
- We need to handle the scaling. We have the option to choose the right-sized EC2 instances. 
- On our behalf AWS will manage the patching and scaling of the instances. 

Amazon EC2 Self managed Node group : 
- We manually need to provision and configure the EC2 instances. 
- We need to handle the scaling, OS operations, and security patches. 

EKS AutoMode : AWS automatically picks the specific configuration of EC2 instances and it costs us very, very little as AWS uses mostly its unused EC2 instances. 

AWS Fargate : this is a serverless: no worker nodes to manage. Our pods are going to run directly. It is very little used as we have limitations: resource limitations and compliance issues, compliance requirement issues. 

=================

Pre-Requisites:

1. AWS CLI Tools should be installed and configured in our laptop.
2. kubectl : Install kubectl to communicate with terrafrom from our laptop.
3. eksctl must be installed


1. console creation : complex, not at all easy
2. eksctl : AWS tool to create the infrastructure along with the network roles with our defined configurations.
3. terraform : use Terraform to create an EKS cluster and whoever uses Terraform widely uses the Terraform EKS module. 


---

Ekscluster creation using eksctl:

pre-req: eksctl must be installed

eksctl create cluster --name ekswithavinash2 --version 1.35 --region ap-south-1 --zones=ap-south-1a,ap-south-1b --nodegroup-name myeksnodes --nodes 2 --nodes-min 1 --nodes-max 4 --node-type c7i-flex.large --node-ami-family=AmazonLinux2023 --managed

---

eks cluster cretaion using terraform:

pre-req: terraform must be installed.

refer the shared code and create eks cluster.

---

D: 10/09/2026

Imperative Approach : we can directly execute a command in our terminal. It is fast to create or manage the resources but the limitation or problem with the imperative approach is tracking the resources. 

eksctl create cluster --name ekswithavinash2 --version 1.35 --region ap-south-1 --zones=ap-south-1a,ap-south-1b --nodegroup-name myeksnodes --nodes 2 --nodes-min 1 --nodes-max 4 --node-type c7i-flex.large --node-ami-family=AmazonLinux2023 --managed

----

Declarative approach : we can write a manifest file and we can apply it to create the resources. All the changes we can apply via this manifest file only so it is a bit easier to track. 

eksctl crete cluster -f cluster.yaml

---
apiVersion: eksctl.io/v1alpha5
kind: ClusterConfig

metadata:
  name: production-cluster
  region: ap-south-1
  version: "1.35"
iam:
  withOIDC: true

# Definition for worker node groups
managedNodeGroups:
  - name: general-purpose-nodes
    instanceType: t3.medium
    desiredCapacity: 3
    minSize: 2
    maxSize: 6
    volumeSize: 50
    volumeType: gp3
    privateNetworking: true
    labels: { role: worker }
    tags:
      nodegroup-role: worker
    iam:
      withAddonPolicies:
        autoScaler: true # Enables permissions needed for Cluster Autoscaler
        cloudWatch: true # Enables CloudWatch container insights logging

---

EKS has 2 types of supports

1. Standard Support : 0.10$/Hour
2. Extended Support : 0.50$/hour 

---

Once the cluster creation is complete we need to update the kubeconfig file on our laptop. 

Windows: c:/users/administrator/.kube/config
Linux: ~/.kube/config

--> To update the kubeconfig run below command

aws eks update-kubeconfig --region ap-south-1 --name ekswithavinash

kubectl get nodes

---

OIDC : OpenID Connect : it is an open identity authentication protocol. This is actually built on top of the OAuth 2.0 framework. 

Enable OIDC Provider on EKS CLuster to get permisisons inside the EKS cluster.

eksctl utils associate-iam-oidc-provider --region ap-south-1 --cluster ekswithavinash --approve

----

apiVersion : v1
supported components: pods, service, namespace, configmaps and secrets

apiVersion: apps/v1
supported compoennts: Deployment, Daemonsets, replicasets




pod: the smallest deployable unit in Kubernetes is a pod. A pod contains containers. 
We cannot directly run a container inside Kubernetes. A pod is a wrapper around a container. 

Q: can a pod contain multiple containers? 

Answer: we can have multiple containers, but one primary container that does the actual job and the other container is a help container. We call that a sidecar container. Both run on two different ports. 


------

kubectl apply -f 01-pod.yaml --dry-run=server			--> dryrun
kubectl apply -f 01-pod.yaml

kubectl get pods
kubectl get pods -o wide							--> shows pods IP and Nodes info
kubectl describe pod myfirstpod						--> Full detials about the pod
kubectl logs myfirstpod								--> Shows the pod's logs
kubectl logs -f myfirstpod							--> shows live logs

kubectl logs myfirstpod -p							--> we can view logs from previou pod / crashed pod.
kubectl logs myfirstpod --previous

kubectl get events									--> Shows all the occured events in k8s

---

Problem with only pod to deliver application : for any reason if the pod got deleted, it is gone. It won't create any new pod automatically. 

Solution : Replicaset

Replicaset : this will ensure our application is running with a given number of identical pods. If any of the pods gets deleted, it will create another pod automatically, almost instantly. 


selector : selector defines how the replica set identifies which pod is responsible for 
"matchlabel" looks for the pods that have the label.

** Important: a ReplicaSet manages the pods that match the selector. 

kubectl get rs
kubectl get replicaset


kubectl delete pod myfirstrs-nnsqm myfirstrs-tgqk4

---
To connect to any pod: we can use "exec"

kubectl exec -it <pod-name> -- /bin/sh

kubectl exec -it mynginx-9f84ff6c8-zjfrx -- /bin/sh
 
--

Problem with Replicaset : We cannot perform any application or version upgrades. 

Ans: Deployment

Deployment: deployment is the Kubernetes highest level of abstraction that manages the replica sets and pods. 

if our nginx version is 1.30.4
We want to upgrade this version to 1.31.5
Deployment ensures our upgradation takes place from 1.30.4 to 1.31.5 without any downtime. 
If we want to rollback, we can rollbck to previous version, id anything goes wrong in the latest deployment.

kubectl exec -it mynginx-5f54c868db-wnqs4 -- /bin/sh

kubectl rollout history deployment/mynginx

kubectl rollout undo deployment/mynginx

kubectl rollout undo deployment/mynginx --to-revision=1

kubectl rollout status deployment/mynginx

kubectl rollout restart deployment/mynginx







